.TH GOTK 1 "March 2026" "gotk" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gotk \- LLM output proxy for token-efficient AI coding
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gotk
.RI [ flags ]
.I command
.RI [ args... ]
.br
.B gotk
.RI [ flags ]
.B exec \-\-
.I command
.RI [ args... ]
.br
.I command
.B |
.B gotk
.RI [ flags ]
.br
.B gotk \-\-shell
.br
.B gotk \-c
.I """command"""
.br
.B gotk \-\-mcp
.br
.B gotk watch
.RI [ flags ]
.B \-\-
.I command
.RI [ args... ]
.br
.B gotk ctx
.RI [ flags ]
.I pattern
.RI [ directory ]
.br
.B gotk bench
.RI [ flags ]
.br
.B gotk measure
.I subcommand
.br
.B gotk learn
.I subcommand
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gotk
acts as a proxy between shell commands and LLMs, cleaning command output to
reduce token consumption by ~80% while preserving semantically important content.
.PP
Output quality is the #1 priority. GoTK never removes error messages, warnings,
stack traces, or diagnostic information. It only strips pure noise: ANSI escape
codes, decorative separators, duplicate lines, redundant path prefixes, and
excessive blank lines.
.PP
GoTK detects the command type (grep, git, find, go test, docker, npm, cargo,
make, curl, python, terraform, kubectl, jq, tar, ssh, tree, etc.) and applies
specialized filters on top of generic cleaning. The result is output that
contains the same information in far fewer tokens.
.PP
GoTK can also learn project-specific noise patterns over time and suggest
custom filter rules for your \fI.gotk.toml\fR configuration.
.SH MODES
.TP
.B Direct mode
.B gotk grep \-rn """func main""" .
.br
Run any command through GoTK. The command type is detected from the binary name.
.TP
.B Explicit mode
.B gotk exec \-\- command args...
.br
Explicitly separate GoTK flags from the command using \fB\-\-\fR.
.TP
.B Pipe mode
.I command
.B | gotk
.br
Read from stdin. The command type is auto-detected from the output format.
.TP
.B Shell proxy
.B gotk \-\-shell
.br
Interactive shell where all commands are filtered. Designed for LLM tool
integration via the
.B SHELL
environment variable.
.TP
.B Shell command
.B gotk \-c """command"""
.br
Execute a single command through the filter pipeline. Compatible with
.BR sh (1)
\fB\-c\fR convention.
.TP
.B MCP server
.B gotk \-\-mcp
.br
Start a Model Context Protocol server over stdio (JSON-RPC). Exposes
.BR gotk_exec ,
.BR gotk_filter ,
.BR gotk_read ,
.BR gotk_grep ,
and
.B gotk_ctx
tools. See
.I docs/cli\-vs\-mcp.md
for CLI vs MCP trade-offs.
.TP
.B Context search
.B gotk ctx BuildChain \-t go
.br
Search the codebase with 5 output modes optimized for LLM consumption.
Built-in exclusions skip node_modules, .git, vendor, lock files, and
binary files. Output goes through the GoTK filter pipeline.
.TP
.B Watch mode
.B gotk watch \-\-ext .go \-\- go test ./...
.br
Watch files for changes and re-run the command with filtered output.
.TP
.B Benchmark
.B gotk bench
.br
Run the built-in benchmark suite on realistic command output fixtures.
.TP
.B Measurement
.B gotk measure report
.br
View token consumption metrics and savings reports.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-stats
Show reduction statistics on stderr (original size, cleaned size, % saved).
.TP
.BR \-m ", " "\-\-max-lines \fIN\fR"
Maximum output lines (default: 50). Keeps head and tail, truncates middle.
.TP
.B \-\-no-truncate
Disable line truncation entirely.
.TP
.B \-\-conservative
Minimal reduction, zero information loss. Sets max-lines to 200 with no truncation.
.TP
.B \-\-balanced
Default mode. Good reduction while preserving important lines.
.TP
.B \-\-aggressive
Maximum reduction, acceptable information loss. Sets max-lines to 30.
.TP
.BI "\-\-mode " MODE
Set filter mode explicitly:
.BR conservative ,
.BR balanced ,
or
.BR aggressive .
.TP
.B \-\-stream
Stream output line-by-line with real-time filtering instead of batch processing.
.TP
.B \-\-measure
Enable token consumption measurement logging for the current invocation.
.TP
.B \-\-learn
Passively observe output for pattern learning. Observations are stored in
.I .gotk\-learn.jsonl
and can be analyzed with
.B gotk learn suggest
to generate custom filter rules.
.TP
.BI "\-\-profile " PROFILE
Set LLM profile:
.BR claude ,
.BR gpt ,
or
.BR gemini .
Auto-detected when running in MCP mode.
.TP
.B \-\-shell
Start proxy shell mode.
.TP
.BI "\-c " """command"""
Execute a single command through the filter pipeline.
.TP
.B \-\-mcp
Start MCP server (Model Context Protocol) over stdio.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show usage summary. Use
.B gotk help
.I subcommand
for detailed help.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version.
.SS Watch flags (before \-\-)
.TP
.BR \-i ", " "\-\-interval \fIDURATION\fR"
Polling interval (default: 2s). Examples: 5s, 500ms, 1m.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " "\-\-ext \fIEXT\fR"
File extension to watch (repeatable). Example:
.B \-e .go \-e .mod
.TP
.BR \-p ", " "\-\-path \fIPATH\fR"
Path to watch (repeatable, default: ".").
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B exec
Execute a command explicitly.
.B gotk exec \-\- grep \-rn """pattern""" .
.TP
.B watch
Watch files and re-run command on changes. See
.B Watch flags
above.
.TP
.B ctx
Context search with 5 output modes.
.RS
.TP
(default)
Scan mode: file paths with match counts, indented matches truncated to 120 chars.
.TP
.BI "\-d " "[N]"
Detail mode: N-line context windows around each match (default: 3), with overlap merging.
.TP
.B \-\-def
Definition mode: language-aware declarations (func, class, struct, type, interface, etc.).
Falls back to keyword match when no definitions are found.
.TP
.B \-\-tree
Tree mode: structural skeleton of matching files (imports, types, functions).
Supports Go, Python, JS/TS, Rust, Java, Ruby, C/C++, and Shell.
.TP
.B \-\-summary
Summary mode: directory breakdown table with file counts and total matches.
.TP
.BI "\-t " "EXT"
File type filter (e.g., \-t go, \-t py). Repeatable.
.TP
.BI "\-g " "GLOB"
Glob filter on filename (e.g., \-g "*.test.js").
.TP
.BI "\-m " "N"
Maximum number of file results (0 = unlimited).
.TP
.BI "\-p " "DIR"
Root directory to search (alternative to positional argument).
.RE
.TP
.B bench
Run benchmarks.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output results as JSON.
.TP
.B \-\-per-filter
Show per-filter contribution breakdown.
.TP
.B \-\-quality
Measure quality score (% of important lines preserved).
.TP
.B \-\-abtest
Compare conservative/balanced/aggressive modes side by side.
.RE
.TP
.B measure
Token consumption measurement.
.RS
.TP
.BI "report " "[--json] [--period DURATION]"
Show token savings report. Period examples: 7d, 30d, 24h.
.TP
.BI "last " "[N]"
Show last N invocations (default: 10).
.TP
.B status
Show measurement status (enabled/disabled, log path, log size).
.TP
.B clear
Clear the measurement log.
.RE
.TP
.B learn
Project-specific pattern learning.
.RS
.TP
.BI "run " "command [args...]"
Execute a command, observe its output for noise patterns. Repeat with different
commands over multiple sessions to build up enough data.
.TP
.B suggest
Analyze collected observations and propose
.B always_remove
regex patterns for
.IR .gotk.toml .
Requires at least 3 sessions (configurable). Patterns that match any
Warning or Error lines are never suggested.
.TP
.B status
Show observation statistics (lines, sessions, store size).
.TP
.B clear
Delete all collected observations.
.RE
.TP
.B help
Show help for a subcommand.
.B gotk help learn
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration files are loaded in order of precedence (lowest to highest):
.TP
.I ~/.config/gotk/config.toml
Global defaults.
.TP
.I .gotk.toml
Project config, found by walking up parent directories to the repository root.
.TP
.I ./gotk.toml
Local override (highest precedence).
.PP
Example configuration:
.PP
.nf
[general]
mode = "balanced"
stats = false
max_lines = 50

[filters]
strip_ansi = true
normalize_whitespace = true
dedup = true
trim_decorative = true
truncate = true

[rules]
always_keep = ["^ERROR:", "^FATAL:"]
always_remove = ["^DEBUG:", "^TRACE:"]

[truncation]
grep = 30
test = 200
git = 100

[security]
command_timeout = 300
sandbox_mode = false

[learn]
min_sessions = 3
min_frequency = 0.05
min_noise = 0.80
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GOTK_PASSTHROUGH=1
Disable all filtering. Output passes through unchanged. Use as an escape hatch.
.TP
.B GOTK_SHELL=/bin/bash
The real shell GoTK uses internally to execute commands. Defaults to
.BR $SHELL
(if not gotk itself), then
.BR /bin/bash ,
then
.BR /bin/sh .
.TP
.B GOTK_BIN
Used by wrapper scripts to locate the gotk binary.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic usage
.nf
# Filter grep output
gotk grep -rn "func main" .

# Filter with stats
gotk --stats git log --oneline -20

# Pipe mode
find . -name "*.go" | gotk

# No truncation
gotk --no-truncate go test ./...
.fi
.SS AI tool integration (CLI mode — recommended)
.nf
# Claude Code: add gotk prefix instructions to CLAUDE.md
# Or use MCP mode: claude mcp add --transport stdio gotk -- gotk --mcp

# Aider
SHELL=/usr/local/bin/gotk GOTK_SHELL=/bin/bash aider

# Cursor
SHELL=/usr/local/bin/gotk GOTK_SHELL=/bin/bash cursor .
.fi
.SS Pattern learning
.nf
gotk learn run go test ./...
gotk learn run make build
gotk learn suggest
gotk --learn cargo build
.fi
.SS Context search
.nf
# Scan mode (default)
gotk ctx BuildChain

# Detail mode with 5 lines of context
gotk ctx BuildChain -d 5

# Definition mode (func, class, type declarations)
gotk ctx Handler --def -t go

# Tree mode (structural skeleton)
gotk ctx main --tree

# Summary mode (directory breakdown)
gotk ctx "func.*Error" --summary

# Filter by type with max results
gotk --stats ctx BuildChain -t go -m 10
.fi
.SS Measurement
.nf
gotk --measure grep -rn "func" .
gotk measure last
gotk measure report --period 7d
.fi
.SH SUPPORTED COMMANDS
GoTK has specialized filters for the following command families:
.TP
.B Search
grep, rg, ag, ack, find, fd
.TP
.B Version control
git, gh
.TP
.B Build tools
go, cargo, rustc, make, cmake, ninja
.TP
.B Package managers
npm, yarn, pnpm, npx, bun, pip, pip3
.TP
.B Containers & orchestration
docker, docker-compose, podman, kubectl, helm, k9s, oc
.TP
.B Infrastructure
terraform, tofu, tf
.TP
.B Network & transfer
curl, wget, http (httpie), ssh, scp, sftp, rsync
.TP
.B File tools
ls, exa, eza, lsd, tree, tar, zip, unzip, gzip, 7z
.TP
.B Data processing
jq, yq, gojq
.TP
.B Scripting
python, python3
.PP
Unknown commands receive generic filtering (ANSI strip, whitespace normalize,
dedup, path compression, truncation). In pipe mode, output format is
auto-detected using pattern matching on the first 50 lines.
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
.I docs/quickstart.md
Quick-start recipes for each AI coding tool.
.TP
.I docs/cli\-vs\-mcp.md
Detailed comparison of CLI vs MCP mode token efficiency.
.TP
.I docs/integrations.md
Advanced integration patterns.
.SH AUTHORS
GoTK contributors.
